c23_interop: Initial draft of reqs/specs for C23 enum interop (#362)
j3-fortran/fortran_proposals: proposals/c23_interop/26-XXX Reqs and specs for interop with C23 enums.txt

To: J3                                                     J3/26-XXX
From: Patrick Fasano
Subject: Requirements and specifications for interoperability with C23
         enumerations
Date: 2026-February-XX

References:
      ISO/IEC 9899:2018 Programming languages -- C ("C17")
      ISO/IEC 9899:2024 Programming languages -- C ("C23")
      WG5/N2212  The new features of Fortran 2023
      WG14/N3029 Improved Normal Enumerations
      WG14/N3030 Enhanced Enumerations

>       23-007r1   Fortran 2023 Working Draft

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      25-007r1   Fortran 2023 Working Draft
```

>       26-112     Edits for updating references from C17 to C23

Reviewer: Please follow the new multi-line reference format [documented here](https://j3-fortran.org/upload.php)

      to represent all the values). In C23, the underlying type can be
      explicitly specified in the enum declaration (e.g., `enum x : long
      long { ... }`).

bg04. The current Fortran specification (25-007r1, subclause 7.6.1)
      relies on the assumption that C enumeration constants fit within a
      C int. This assumption is explicitly stated in Note 2 of the
      subclause: "ISO/IEC 9899:2018 guarantees the enumeration constants
      fit in a C int (ISO/IEC 9899:2018, 6.7.2.2). Therefore, the
      Fortran processor can evaluate all enumerator values using the
      integer type with kind parameter C_INT, and then determine the
      kind parameter of the integer type that is interoperable with the
      corresponding C enumerated type." With the adoption of WG14/N3029
      in C23, this guarantee no longer holds. C enumerations may now
      have values that cannot be represented in a C int.

bg06. The edits in paper 26-112 adopted by J3 at meeting #238 in January
      2026 to replace references to C17 with C23 in the Fortran
      specification introduced a factually incorrect statement regarding
      C enumerations in Note 2 of subclause 7.6.1, which was not

>       addressed in that paper. This paper addresses this issue by

Reviewer: This run-on sentence is hard to parse.

```suggestion
bg06. The edits in paper 26-112 adopted by J3 at meeting #238 in January
      2026 replaced references to C17 with C23 in the Fortran specification. 
      That introduced a factually incorrect statement regarding
      C enumerations in Note 2 of subclause 7.6.1, which was not
      addressed in that paper. This paper addresses this issue by
```

          KIND parameter to ENUM.

          Implicitly (or explicitly) require that the Fortran processor
          determine the KIND of the enumerators via the new C23 rules;
          add an explicit (optional) KIND parameter to ENUM declarations
          which override any implicit determination.

The subgroup recommends OPTION A.

Straw poll analysis
-------------------

PROS OPTION A:
AP01. Minimal option.
AP02. Implicitly fixes the problem with Note 2 (by making it true by
      restriction).
AP03. Should not require any Fortran compiler backend changes, just
      spec wording.

CONS OPTION A:
AC01. Does not allow interoperability with C's new "wider" (64-bit)
      enum types, or even explicitly "narrower" enum types (e.g. 8-bit).
AC02. Must add spec constraint to restrict allowable enumerators.
AC03. Compiler changes to check the new constraint are required.

PROS OPTION B:
BP01. No syntax change.
BP02. Maintains interoperability with the implicit behavior of C enums.
BP03. No new standard verbiage required.
BP04. Compatible with C paper WG14/N3029.

CONS OPTION B:
BC01. Probably still requires some compiler changes to accommodate new

>       wider enums.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BC01. Likely requires some compiler changes to accommodate new
      wider enums.
```

CC02. Requires compiler parsing and backend changes (hence might be
      considered a new feature).

4 Specifications
================

4.1 Specifications for Option A
-------------------------------

sa01. The definition of "interoperable enumerator" should be constrained
      to require the values of the enumerators to be representable in
      the integer type with kind parameter C_INT.

sa02. Update or remove Note 2 in subclause 7.6.1 to reflect that
      interoperability is restricted to enumerations where constants fit
      in a C int.

4.2 Specifications for Option B
-------------------------------

sb01. Remove Note 2 in subclause 7.6.1 which incorrectly states that C
      enumeration constants are guaranteed to fit in a C int.

sb02. The Fortran processor shall determine the interoperable kind of
      the enumerators based on the type chosen by the companion
      processor for the corresponding C enumerated type, which may be
      wider than C_INT.

sb03. Add a Note to subclause 7.6.1 to explain that C23 allows
      enumeration constants that do not fit in a C int, and that the
      Fortran processor may need to evaluate all enumerator values using

>       an integer type larger than that with kind parameter C_INT, before

Reviewer: "than that with" is still grammatically awkward, but your suggestion resolves my technical objection.

>       an integer type larger than that with kind parameter C_INT, before

Author: ```suggestion
      an integer type with wider range than the integer type with kind 
      parameter C_INT, before
```

      determining the kind parameter that is interoperable with the C
      enumerated type.

4.3 Specifications for Option C
-------------------------------

sc01. Extend the syntax of the ENUM statement to allow an optional KIND
      parameter to specify the underlying integer type. One possible

>       syntax is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      syntax (shown only for illustrative purposes):
```

      ENUM[(KIND=scalar-int-constant-expr)], BIND(C) [:: enum-type-name]

      Thus, for a C23 enumerator declared as this:

         enum my_long_enum : long {
            red = 4,
            blue = 9,
            yellow
         };

      an Fortran interoperable enumeration would be declared as this:

         ENUM(KIND=C_LONG), BIND(C) :: my_long_enum
            ENUMERATOR :: RED = 4, BLUE = 9
            ENUMERATOR YELLOW
         END ENUM

sc02. If the KIND parameter is present, the kind type parameter of the
      enumerators is the value specified by the KIND parameter. The
      companion processor shall use a compatible underlying type.

sc03. If the KIND parameter is absent, the Fortran processor shall
      determine the interoperable kind of the enumerators based on the
      type chosen by the companion processor for the corresponding C
      enumerated type, which may be wider than C_INT.

sc04. Add a Note to subclause 7.6.1 to explain that C23 allows
      enumeration constants that do not fit in a C int, and that the
      Fortran processor may need to evaluate all enumerator values using

>       an integer type larger than that with kind parameter C_INT, before

Author: See comment above.

      determining the kind parameter that is interoperable with the C

>       enumerated type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      enumerated type.
      
==END==      
```

To: J3                                                     J3/26-XXX
From: Patrick Fasano & HPC
Subject: Reqs/specs for interoperability with C23 enumerations
Date: 2026-February-XX

References:
      ISO/IEC 9899:2018 ! Programming languages -- C ("C17")
      ISO/IEC 9899:2024 ! Programming languages -- C ("C23")
      WG5/N2212  ! The new features of Fortran 2023
      WG14/N3029 ! Improved Normal Enumerations
      WG14/N3030 ! Enhanced Enumerations
      23-007r1   ! Fortran 2023 Working Draft

>       26-112     ! Edits for updating references from C17 to C23

Author: If this doesn't work, I think I'd rather help @sblionel improve his parser than change my paper. 🙂

>       26-112     ! Edits for updating references from C17 to C23

Reviewer 2: The parser will not understand this - you'll get no references at all. Please change the paper. Each like should begin with "Reference: ".

      proposing options for resolving the incompatibility and providing
      specifications for each option.

2 Requirements
==============

rq01. The Fortran standard should be updated to address the
      incompatibility between Fortran interoperable enumerations and C23
      enumerations.

3 Straw polls
=============

Straw poll
----------
How should the incompatibility with C23 enumerations be resolved?

OPTION A: Restrict interoperability to C enums compatible with C_INT.

          Add a precondition that says interoperability requires that
          the C enum have a type that fits within an INTEGER(C_INT).

OPTION B: Implicitly determine KIND via new C23 rules.

          Remove the incorrect note and implicitly require that the
          Fortran processor determine the KIND of the enumerators via
          the new C23 rules; do not allow explicitly declaring the KIND.
          Optionally, add a new note on how the Fortran processor
          evaluates the enumerator values to determine the interoperable
          KIND parameter.

OPTION C: Implicitly determine KIND via new C23 rules and add explicit
          KIND parameter to ENUM.

>           Implicitly (or explicitly) require that the Fortran processor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          Require that the Fortran processor
```

sb02. The Fortran processor shall determine the interoperable kind of
      the enumerators based on the type chosen by the companion
      processor for the corresponding C enumerated type, which may be
      wider than C_INT.

sb03. Optionally, add a replacement Note to subclause 7.6.1 to explain
      that C23 allows
      enumeration constants that do not fit in a C int, and that the
      Fortran processor may need to evaluate all enumerator values using
      an integer type with wider range than the integer type with kind
      parameter C_INT, before
      determining the kind parameter that is interoperable with the C
      enumerated type.

4.3 Specifications for Option C
-------------------------------

sc01. Extend the syntax of the ENUM statement to allow an optional KIND
      parameter to specify the underlying integer type. One possible
      syntax (shown only for illustrative purposes):

      ENUM[(KIND=scalar-int-constant-expr)], BIND(C) [:: enum-type-name]

      Thus, for a C23 enumerator declared as this:

         enum my_long_enum : long {
            red = 4,
            blue = 9,
            yellow
         };

>       an Fortran interoperable enumeration would be declared as this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      a corresponding Fortran interoperable enumeration could be declared as:
```
